## Perkinsea: a global perspective of environmental distribution and diversity explored by a meta-analysis of eDNA surveys

### Summary

Perkinsea (also known as Perkinsids or Perkinsozoa) is a lineage of the Alveolata superphylum mainly represented by parasitic organisms. Although many representatives are well-known as responsible for socio-economic and ecological impacts, they are still overlooked in environmental surveys and the extend of their diversity is currently unknown. This lack of knowledge represents an important gap that needs urgent attention, even more considering that some of these organisms are responsible for host mortality events worldwide. Here, we explored an extensive metabarcoding dataset of the V4 region of the 18S rRNA gene (the EukBank dataset) to uncover the diversity, distribution and environmental preferences of the Perkinsea. We show that the Perkinsea are highly diverse, with 1,568 Amplicon Sequence variants (ASVs) and distributed across thousands of environmental samples. We detected a large diversity of Perkinsea in soil samples, although they were previously thought to be restricted to marine and freshwater environments. Moreover, we show that more than a quarter of Perkinsea-like ASVs are related to potential novel organisms, a remarkable figure within well-known taxonomic groups like the Perkinsidae. We also unveil the environmental distribution of previously undetected taxonomic groups, such as the Xcellidae. Even though further works are necessary to understand their ecological functioning, we can expect the emergence of novel host-parasite interactions with severe implications in ecosystems.


